---
published: false
---
Now that some of scaffolding and ground-leveling is done around a project I've been working on, it felt like a good time to step back and try to philosophize and narratize (that should be a word).

In short, the project is a python client for Fedora Commons 4, boringly called "**[pyfc4]**"(https://github.com/ghukill/pyfc4).  In my defense, I've worked on projects with some pretty fun names: ["Ouroboros"](https://github.com/WSULib/ouroboros), a middleware for wrangling the chaos of a digital collections universe; ["ichabod"](https://github.com/WSULib/ichabod), a *headless* browser that rendered pages and used fuzzy matching to determine if the content had changed much; to name a couple.  But this felt like a project that deserved a sane, calm, simple name.

Why's that?  Because, at best, pyfc4 should get out of your way.

## Background

Over the past few years, we've built a digital collections platform/infrastructure I'm quite proud of around Fedora Commons 3.x, Solr, and the other usual suspects.  And we did this using primarily python.  The decision to use python was not calculated, other than we had more collective experience with the language at the time, and were blissfully unaware how much work rolling our own middleware would be, as opposed to using other ecosystems like [Hydra (now Samvera)](https://wiki.duraspace.org/display/samvera/Samvera) or [Islandora](https://islandora.ca/), both really excellent and vibrant codebases and communities.

We knew Fedora was going to be in the mix, but how to communicate with it?  After some initial work making raw HTTP calls to Fedora's REST API, we stumbled on "[eulfedora]"(https://github.com/emory-libraries/eulfedora), the phenomenal, intuitive, and joy-to-use python client for Fedora Commons 3.x.  Eulfedora describes itself as:

> eulfedora is a Python module that provides utilities, API wrappers, and classes for interacting with the Fedora-Commons Repository in a pythonic, object-oriented way, with optional Django integration. 

> ...

> eulfedora.api provides complete access to the Fedora API, primarily making use of Fedora's REST API. This low-level interface is wrapped by eulfedora.server.Repository and eulfedora.models.DigitalObject, which provide a more abstract, object-oriented, and Pythonic way of interacting with a Fedora Repository or with individual objects and datastreams.

This description accurately and succinctly describe what eulfedora is, and does, but does not attempt to justify its existence or utility in the face of alternatives.  It leaves out things like handling encoding, large file streaming, alerting user's to identifiers (PIDs) that break Fedora's PID rules, and the list goes on.  Like other language specific API wrappers out there, Eulfedora wrangles the specification of its target, and that of the target's API, into a patterns and information reporting that is helpful to the user.

Eulfedora is integral to our digital collections platform, and has functioned almost without reproach for years now.  Sure, we've encountered some strange edge cases, and even submitted an update or two, but 99.99% of the time, eulfedora does precisely *what* you expect, and *how* you expect it should happen.

And so, it's unsurprising that eulfedora would be an inspiration for pyfc4; a python client to serve a very similar, but worth noting, not identical, role for Fedora Commons 4.x and its complete overhaul of philosophy and architecture.

One area that pyfc4 distinctly deviates from eulfedora is no current integrations or configurations specific to Django.  That time may come, but not yet.

## Overview

pyfc4 is envisioned as a lightweight python client for interacting with an instance of Fedora Commons 4.x.  























